Former CNN war correspondent
Arwa Damon has been to the enclave
three times during this war
with her charity, Inara,
and she says that each trip reveals
that there is, quote,
less aid and more need.
I reached her this week from Daryl Balla
on the Gaza coast.
Arwa Damon,
welcome back to the program from Gaza.
Thank you for having me on.
Appreciate it.
Well, last time you were here,
after one of your trips,
you were in the studio
and you said essentially,
you know, things
just get exponentially worse.
I asked you last time how it was.
What is it
like this time
compared to when you were last there?
It's a sorrow
that is eclipsing
any kind of sorrow I've seen before.
It's misery beyond the scope of misery.
It's less humanitarian assistance,
less ability
to support those who are in need
and an increasingly growing population
that extends to just
about every single human being
in this wretched stretch of land
who cannot cope with
even the most basic of things.
Christiane, we,
international aid organizations
and local ones
have been reduced to trying to advocate
for something as simple as a bar of soap.
Honestly, it's become a lot.
It's terrible to hear you say that.
And I know you tweeted that.
Just explain what you mean by that
and what
what difference in life
and death would soap make right now?
So the bare bones of it
is that access to soap
and the ability
to maintain a certain level
of hygiene, reduces
the spread of disease by 40%.
What we are seeing right now
is a significant increase
in diseases like hepatitis A.
I went down to Nasser Hospital,
and the head of the pediatric department
there told me that two children
a week are dying just in that hospital
because of hepatitis A.
It also means meningitis is spreading.
It also means that
this horrific skin
disease called impetigo,
which is especially prevalent
in children and highly contagious
and can potentially be lethal
because if left untreated,
it can lead to kidney failure,
which can lead to death
is also all over the place.
These are all diseases
that can be controlled,
which in return would empty
a bed space in these hospitals
to be able
to deal with the catastrophic injuries
that they're getting
from the bomb blasts.
But there's no soap.
We go into these camps
and families are begging us for soap.
What are they use instead of soap?
Well, one family
I spoke to said that they were going down
to the beach, getting sand,
mixing it
with a little bit of salt and lemon.
And that's how they've
been cleaning themselves
for the last five months.
So if the cease fire,
which we've all been advocating for,
to be able
to get more humanitarian aid
and obviously hasn't
materialized for the last ten months,
we are now trying to simplify it
down to soap.
Oh my goodness.
I mean, that's really awful
to hear you say that.
and I just need to say,
because there's a report
that actually where you are, I think
near Deborah. Right.
There's the coast.
There is apparently showing up all brown
and murky
because of massive sewage spills.
So these people are going there
also to try to get clean,
but there's not even clean seawater.
And Christiane,
what people don't realize
when they hear about evacuation
orders is, yes,
we are very familiar
with that horrendous image of people
just carrying what they can.
But each evacuation order
impacts organizations
ability to distribute and produce
safe, clean water.
So the most recent evacuation orders
over the last two weeks from
hand hygiene units
reduced the population's
access to clean water by 70%.
So that has already had an impact
on what people are going through.
But if we extrapolate beyond
that and look at what's
happening in the ICUs,
I was in the ICU at hospital.
There's a 13 year old boy
with severe burn injuries.
He is in the ICU
because he has a blood infection
and signs of early sepsis,
because there weren't enough bandages
to be able
to keep his wounds properly clean.
There was a little year
and a half old girl
who is not stabilizing
from her catastrophic injuries,
because the small piece of plastic
called a tracheotomy or something
is not available in her size.
Now, we were luckily able to secure
some for her
and deliver them to the hospital.
But if this little girl wakes
up, Christiane,
she's going to wake up and find out
that she's an orphan.
Oh, no. Oh, this is just so awful.
We hear about the huge number of children
who have become orphans.
We also hear
a polio reported
for the first time
in 25 years in the Gaza Strip.
Apparently, a ten month old baby
was partially paralyzed.
I don't know whether you've been able
to hear
from the other humanitarians, the U.N.,
but apparently they're trying to start
even in the midst of this war
and destruction
of a polio vaccine program.
Is that possible?
Yeah, they have to.
And, you know,
there is movement in terms of,
you know,
getting a cold chain
in, getting the vaccine in
and training of people
to be able to deliver the vaccine.
The plan is on the table,
but the plan, absolutely, 100%
cannot be implemented
unless there is some sort of a pause
in the fighting that is taking place.
And if that pause does not happen,
and if polio starts to spread,
we are going to start seeing and hearing
more and more horrific stories
of more and more children
ending up paralyzed of something
that, again, is completely preventable.
I do not have the words
to begin to describe
just how hard it is
to provide people
with even the most basic of items,
because things are not available.
I just came back from a fresh
vegetable distribution,
to a couple of the shelters
that that we work with,
some of the families,
and we purchased
this locally, by the way,
because
aid isn't really moving in,
but commercial trucks are.
We purchased
some of these items at 20 times
their original price either.
Doesn't matter because these families
had not eaten
a fresh vegetable
for anywhere from five months,
and then at best, one
month was the last time
they had had fresh vegetables.
Oh, listen,
I mean, is the fighting worse
now than it was
two, three, four months ago?
I mean, the Israelis seem to say
they're busy degrading Hamas.
They're in these cease fire
hostage swap negotiations.
and yet, as you
say, aid is not getting in.
And we can quote also this week, the U.N.
said humanitarian efforts
ground to a halt
because of new Israeli evacuation orders.
The International Rescue Committee
also had to stop aid
during these evacuation orders.
It I mean, it's getting worse.
The international community
says it's trying to get aid
in, but you're saying
is practically at a trickle.
At best, it's less than a trickle.
It's like that
tiny little drop
that barely comes out of the faucet.
And we also had to suspend our usual sort
of programs and activities
for a few days,
because two of our staff
and five of the shelters that we worked
with were under evacuation orders.
And I myself have,
you know,
moved around a couple of times
in the last two weeks
that that I've been here.
The problem we have with
aid is the same as what it was
two months ago, but significantly worse.
We cannot access
the aid that Israel permits
to enter
Kerem Shalom,
because the route that Israel designates
for us to use to get that aid
is basically run by looters
and criminal gangs,
and Israel
is not securing that route,
nor is it providing us
with alternate routes.
There are alternatives that exist.
We can use
what's known as defense route,
where in theory,
Israel had at one point stated
that it would allow 40
trucks to go through there,
mostly trucks carrying medicine and fuel.
These days, on a lucky day.
And it's not even daily
you're getting about 18 trucks
moving through there, items
that get into the north
through eddies right now. So that's soap.
I've been talking about
those hygiene kits.
They actually do get into
the northern part of Gaza,
but we are not permitted to move them
from the north to the south.
So we can't even scale up
what's being sent through the north.
Why they will not give us
a straight answer.
We do not get straight answers
as to why we cannot properly move aid
from the South.
So, for example,
fresh vegetables,
because we have them down here,
we can buy them
and send them to the north.
Nor are we allowed to move
what gets into the north.
Hygiene kits down for
the population in the south.